### Introduction and framing

A sole focus on reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is not sufficient to mitigate the existential threat of climate change. Net removal of GHGs is paramount to slow the warming of the planet. When considering the scale of change that needs to be accomplished in the next decade, nature-based solutions for carbon removal, such as reforestation, afforestation, and regenerative agriculture, are by far the most mature and scalable at this time.

Regenerative agriculture in particular has garnered significant attention as a potential pathway to transform the agricultural sector from a significant source of global GHG emissions, such as carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, to a global carbon sink. [Lal (2020)](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00380768.2020.1718548?needAccess=true) estimates the global soil carbon stock down to a depth of 2 meters contains 2047 Pg of soil organic carbon and 1558 Pg of soil inorganic carbon. An estimated global loss of 133 Pg of soil organic carbon is attributed to past land management practices and soil degradation. With the adoption of regenerative practices, [Lal (2020)](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00380768.2020.1718548?needAccess=true) estimates that 178 Pg of soil organic carbon can be sequestered over the 2020-2100 time horizon.

While the long-term benefits of regenerative stewardship are unquestioned, the potential of regenerative agriculture to produce meaningful carbon sequestration in the near team continues to be vigorously debated ([Bossio et al. (2020)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-020-0491-z), [Bradford et al. (2020)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-019-0431-y), [Paustian et al. (2020)](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5c3780907c9327dc2a2e8c64/t/5ee0ed849bd3430a15121b12/1591799173373/Regen+Ag+pdf+061020.pdf), [Ranganathan et al. (2020)](https://www.wri.org/blog/2020/05/regenerative-agriculture-climate-change)). 
Framing the debate itself is complex due to variability in its reduction to practice. The common approach to defining regenerative agriculture is through a specification of practices that, when leveraged together in a holistic management strategy, generate a range of positive ecological outcomes, such as the following specified in The Carbon Underground's [widely supported definition](https://thecarbonunderground.org/our-initiative/definition/)

* Greater soil biota diversity and health
* Increasing biodiversity above and below the soil surface
* Increasing water holding capacity
* Soil carbon sequestration at greater depths
* Soil structure improvements reducing soil loss

The set of regenerative practices producing these outcomes include
* Minimal disturbance of the soil (no-till/minimum tillage)
* Keeping a living root in the soil at all times
* Diversity in cover crops and crop rotations
* Integration of livestock with managed grazing

Since these practices are meant to be integrated into a holistic approach tailored to each agricultural context, estimating the impact of a regenerative system a priori is fraught with complexity. Transition to regenerative stewardship is therefore a process of incremental innovation driven by continuous experimentation. Along this journey, measurement of ecological outcomes is absolutely critical to gauge the success of the evolving strategy.

In support of the drive to define low-cost, scalable approaches to measure ecological outcomes, our objective in this work is to address a targeted measurement question. Can satellite-based remote sensing be leveraged to estimate the current state of soil carbon stocks over agricultural lands and, more importantly, their change over time?

As farmers transition from conventional to regenerative systems, the rate at which soil health recovers is determined by the number of regenerative practices they integrate into their management strategies. In the context of the U.S., most conventional farmers take an incremental approach to mitigate their risk, slowing the recovery of soil organic carbon stocks. Among the small group of regenerative pioneers who have integrated at a minimum no-till / minimum tillage, cover cropping, and diverse crop rotations into their operations, soil organic carbon stock recovery has progressed significantly faster. 

Given the current uncertainty in the sequestration potential of regenerative systems, what scale of change annually should any estimation protocol be able to assert is present with high probability when it occurs? According to the latest estimates by Project Drawdown for [regenerative annual cropping](https://www.drawdown.org/solutions/regenerative-annual-cropping), "farms are seeing soil carbon levels rise from a baseline of 1 to 2 percent up to 5 to 8 percent over ten or more years." Therefore in the most optimistic scenario over a ten year period, soil organic carbon stocks are expected to rise on average 0.4-0.6% annually. Similarly, the international [4 per 1000 initiative](https://www.4p1000.org/) introduced by France in 2015 aims to demonstrate that an increase of 0.4% per year in soil carbon stocks will produce a significant reduction in carbon dioxide concentration due to human activities. For the purposes of this evaluation, we will assume that detecting a 0.4% annual change in soil organic carbon stock with high probability is a beneficial target. 

In our investigation, we will be examining and extending existing techniques for inferring soil organic carbon stocks on agricultural lands down to a specified depth based on ground truth soil sampling and environmental covariates observed via satellite-based remote sensing. Our particular emphasis will be on understanding and characterizing the various sources of uncertainty and propagating uncertainty through to the estimation of the rate of change.

Opening questions guiding the investigation include the following
* At present, accurate estimation of soil organic carbon stocks at field scale is cost prohibitive and the subject of ongoing research. High spatial variability in soil organic carbon necessitates more advanced estimation protocols to balance the expense of core sampling with the need for accuracy. When developing a model for inferring soil organic carbon stocks over a finite spatial extent, what is the procedure used to generate the ground truth estimates and how is the associated uncertainty in those estimates incorporated into the modeling process?
* As regenerative practices are integrated into a farm's management strategy, soil organic carbon stocks will still exhibit variability due to factors such as temperature and precipitation, even as a macro-scale trend unfolds. In the presence of such variability, how should the change in a farm's soil organic carbon stock be assessed? Should a difference in coarse time-scale (monthly / quarterly / seasonally) predictions of average soil organic carbon stock for consecutive years be estimated? Are the existing soil databases sufficient in terms of both spatial and temporal sampling resolution to support such predictions?
* Soil sample processing exhibits variability across laboratories. To what extent has that variability been characterized? What impact does it have on the uncertainty in the prediction of the rate of change?
* What soil sampling depth is necessary for a comprehensive estimate of the soil organic carbon stock? Are the samples within existing soil databases sufficiently deep?
* The generalization performance of any model must be assessed both spatially and temporally, and some mechanism is required to assess whether a given prediction should be accepted or rejected. By definition, any model developed in this context will be incomplete; therefore it is imperative to detect when the model is being applied in a context that lies beyond the scope characterized by the training data. What options exist for defining the regime in which predictions will be rejected? To what extent can we assess the generalization performance of the model both spatially and temporally with existing soil databases? 

TODO: Relate a typical annual rate of change in terms of % SOC to soil organic stocks measured in Mg/ha.
Note: SOC(kg/ha) = SOC(%) × Bulk Density(g/cm3) × Sampling Depth(cm) x 1000
